This file will contain selected passages from the automatic translation (via DeepL)
of the French translation of Tarikh al-Fattash. 
Passages are titles and labeled for reference within the original source.
The English parts here have been corrected by removing reptitions, page numbers, and footnotes/commentary.

Arabic text on HathiTrust: https://hdl.handle.net/2027/hvd.hndhq3
French text on HathiTrust: https://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89012185690 and https://hdl.handle.net/2027/ien.35556012109526

PASSAGE 1
Original Arabic: Pages 15-19 of the Arabic text on HathiTrust, lines lines 22-123 in 
\TimbuktuChronicles\data\corrections\tarikh-al-fattash-ara-pgs15-31-corrected.txt

In the name of God, the merciful. May
God shower his blessings on our Lord Muhammad,
his family and his companions, and grant them
salvation to them!
This is what the learned sheikh, the learned jurisconsult said,
the upright cadi, the austere, the scrupulous, the saintly, the learned,
the pious, the devout Sıdı Mahmoud Kati', from a family of
Kourmina', domiciled in Timbuktu and of Udkore origin,
God the Most High will have mercy on him and will allow us to benefit from the favor he has bestowed on him,
the favor he has bestowed upon him! So be it.
<pb n="34"/>
Praise be to God, the only one in sovereignty, in power
in glory, in authority, in dominion, in victory, in goodness,
in mercy, the ruler, the rewarder, the mighty, the
liberal, who created the heaven and the earth, who taught Adam the name of things 
and drew from his loins the princes and the
and shepherds of the peoples, some of whom were proud and
and the others benevolent and pious. He put them to the test
with the help of the facts and events that he has made them and threatened them with 
His punishment through His eminent envoys, destroying those who resisted and
gave them as an example to the wise and as a warning to
devotees. Then he transmitted the knowledge of the Prophets 
and their authority to the Khalifes, so that it is through them 
that the oppressed may find refuge in them, and that the rebellious may be brought down by them. In
He has made them His shadow on the earth and has given them an ornament 
which is not simply that of the reflection of 
light in a pool. Those who obey them are on the right path and will be 
rewarded; those who turn away from them 
will be led astray and disappointed.
We praise God because of the abundant favors and 
blessings with which He has blessed us by making us His devoted
and in keeping away from us the wickedness of our enemies through
the invocations of the teachers, the exhortations of the wise and the
of the sultans and khalifes.
But it is to him that we must give thanks and praise, 
and it is before him that we must bow down and
and prostrate ourselves, for He is the One who is the
<pb n="35"/>"
Supreme Master. Whoever obeys him is on the right path
and clings to a support that will not fail him; whoever
rebels against him is in error and will be punished by the loss of
his reward and his illusions.
We proclaim that there is no god but God:
this testimony we give as one who resists his heart and 
his passions to conform to the orders of the
the Lord's commands, and we will continue to give it, God willing, until
God willing, the day of our meeting with him, the day when neither 
fortune nor children will be of any help
and when we must come to God with a pure heart.
We also proclaim that our Lord Mohammed is
the glorious worshipper of God, his merciful messenger,
his benevolent chosen one, his loyal confidant, the one who brought
the truthful verses, performed brilliant miracles and produced 
decisive arguments. God sent him to consolidate Islam, to lead men, to break idols
and to expound the rules of justice and law. It was he who said
said: "This era began with prophecy and mercy,
it will continue with khalifat and mercy, etc. "'.
It is he who said: "A fraction of my people will not
cease to be in the truth until the day when the last hour
will come"? And again he said: "You must stick to my rule
the orthodox Khalifes will be torn apart after me.
after me. God shower his blessings on him and blessings on him and grant him salvation, 
as well as to his pious and generous companions, who were like devouring lions, 
his brothers and his descendants!
It is to the descendants of these eminent lords that
to the descendants of these eminent lords, to whom every noble sheriff is linked by a certain genealogy;

<pb n="36"/>"

every conscientious scholar must be inspired by their works;
every pious man must model himself on each of their intimate
every virtuous and devout man should conduct himself according to their generous words; every director of knowledge
should follow the straight path they have traced; every solitary ascetic should light his lamp by the light of their faith; every man
man desiring goodness must climb to the summit of their
knowledge.
May the Lord give them, in default of us, the best of retributions
and may he grant them the highest reward on the day of the last meeting!
may he grant them the highest of rewards! May he, in his generosity
put us among those who walk in the right path 
and that he reserves for us a place among the
chosen ones! May he, through their benevolent intercession, place us 
among the blessed! May he answer our prayer 
in consideration of the best of creatures, the most eminent of those
to whom he has given faith, the most generous of those
who have walked the earth!
<pb n="37"/>"

The deeds of the rulers, princes, and great ones of the
earth are one of the things that philosophers and great doctors are wont to tell
philosophers and great doctors. They do so to conform to the tradition of the
of the Qur'an, to recall the events that time has
erased, to bring to light to that which has been forgotten through neglect, 
and to help the conscientious man to do good to his fellow people.
God has granted us the favor of bringing to light
the virtuous Imâm, the upright Khalifa, the victorious king
the askia? El-Hâdj Mohammed ben Aboubakar, descendant of the Tôrodo and belonging to a family of Gaoga
(Gaogao), where his residence was,

<pb n="38"/>"

This prince has made the light of faith succeed among us
to the darkness of the darkness and he brought us back to the right way
from error and iniquity. Thanks to
God, all the countries submitted to him from the east to the west, 
and delegations came to him in succession
either isolated or in groups, and the princes made their submission
of will or of force. It is thus that, by
the divine protection, we have been filled with goods and favors
after having been in trouble and misfortune. God the most
in his goodness, has made this transformation and, as he said to the most
generous of his creatures, "next to adversity is happiness".
I wanted to gather here the most remarkable events of his reign
of the events of his reign, also mentioning the cursed Shi'i, as far as it has been possible to do so
to do it with the help of written and oral documents' and by seeking 
my support from God the most high.
I have entitled this book Tarikh el-fetlách fi akhbar el-bouldán
oua-l-djouyouch oua-akabir en-nás. It talks about
wars and the main events that took place in the Tekroûr, as well as of the distribution to be made between the
genealogy of the tribes of servile condition and that of the tribes of
noble condition.

<pb n="40"/>"
<pb n="41"/>"
CHAPTER I
Main particularities of the life and reign
of the askia El Hadj Mohammed,
-
Know that God has mercy on us and on you!
that the just Imâm, the eminent king, the askia El-Hådj
Mohammed, as soon as he was elevated to power, organized the Songai
and gave it institutions. This is how,
of the whole army, the dyina-koïe had the right to sit on a carpet
at the sovereign's audiences; the dyinai alone also
had the privilege of not covering himself with dust
in his presence and could be satisfied with covering himself with flour.
Everyone had to remove their caps when covering themselves with dust, except for Rourmina-fári.
Only the Dendi-faris could afford to make frank remarks to the ruler.
Only the Bara-
<pb n="42"/>"
koi' had a right of veto, which the prince had to take into account
willy-nilly. Only the Dirma-koï was authorized not to
get off his horse to enter the royal palace.
Alone in the whole kingdom, the câdi was authorized to mandate
a servant of the prince to entrust him with a mission to which
the servant could not evade, and to make him do
for him what he would have done for the askia. Nobody could,
in a royal audience, question the prince by name,
except the guissiridonké". No one, unless he was a sheriff, was
allowed to sit next to the king on his platform.
The askia also decided that, when the câdis came to him, he would
have a prayer mat spread out for them
he decided that the eunuchs of his house would stand 
to his left, that he would not stand up for anyone except for
for the scholars and
the pilgrims when they returned from Mecca, that the scholars 
and their children would be the only ones allowed to eat with him, but that it would be
the same for those without, even if they were very
God have mercy on this prince!
It was so at least at the beginning of his reign, because he wanted the affection of his entourage. But,
when his power was consolidated (gold) and that the business
<pb n="43"/>"
and public affairs had taken their normal course, these privileges were no longer
were no longer maintained.

<line 959 in TimbuktuChronicles\tarikh-al-fattash-fra1.txt:> 

He also decided to consult the practicing ulama about
the traditions of the Messenger of God (God shower his blessings and
blessings and salvation upon him!) and to follow their
recommendations: God have mercy on him! Therefore, all the
all the scholars of his time agreed that he was a true 
that he was a true Khalifa.
Among those who made this statement about him, it is worth mentioning
Sheikh Abderrahman Es-Soyoûti, Sheikh Mohammed ben Abdelûti, and
Sheikh Mohammed ben Abdelkerîm El-Meghîli, the Sheikh
Chamharoûch of the race of the geniuses and the hassanide sheriff
Moulaï El-Abbas, prince of Mecca: God have mercy on them all!
He granted rights to the Muslims and imposed on them marks of respect towards his person. He decided
that the people of Móri-koiras should marry whomever they wished and
that the children born of these unions would be of the same condition
as their fathers, a rule that is still in force today and 
has not been modified, thanks to the favor with which God
God have mercy on this prince! He gave
to the sheriff Ahmed Es-Seqli' the territory surrounding the 
villages and islands.
The Hassanid sheriff Moulaï El-Abbàs was one day with the prince of the believers, 
the khalife of the Moslems, the askia
El-hâdj Mohammed, sitting near the Ka'ba, and both were talking 
together: said to the askia, "O you who are here," said the sheriff Moulaï El-Abbâs, 
"you are the eleventh of the khalifes of whom
of whom the Envoy of God spoke (God shower his blessings on him and grant him
blessings and salvation upon him!); but you came to us as a king, 
and one cannot combine the two titles
of king and khalifa. -- How then, my lord?
asked the askia. -- There is only one way, replied
Moulaï El-Abbâs, it is that you leave your current condition".
The askia accepted this proposal and, after having removed
all his ministers, he gathered all his royal insignia and treasures, 
gave everything into the hands of El-Abbâs and
thus found himself deposed by himself. Moulaï El-Abbâs 
then locked himself up in the retreat during three days, then he left it 
came out of it on Friday, convened the askia El-Hadj Mohammed and
and made him sit in the mosque of the noble city of Mecca.
Then he put on his head a green cap and a white turban,
gave him a sword and took the crowd of the assistants as witnesses
that he instituted him khalife for the country of Tekroûr and that 
whoever disobeyed his orders in this country would disobey God
God the Most High and his Messenger.
Then the askia El-Hâdj Mohammed prepared to return 
in his States. When he arrived in Cairo, he met Sheikh
Abderrahman Es-Soyoûti and asked him about the Khalifes 
of whom the Messenger of God (God shower his
blessings and salvation upon him!)
to come after him.
The sheikh replied: "There should be twelve, 
five in Medina, two in Cairo, one in Syria and two in Iraq.
all of them have already reigned; there are still two to come,
who will reign in the land of Tekroûr: 
you are one of these two and the other will come after you. Your family is related
to the Tôrodo', who descend from the people of Yemen, and your 
residence will be Gaogao. You will be well led, victorious 
equitable, very happy, very liberal and very charitable.

Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version)